# Introduction

Short read metagenomic sequencing has expanded our knowledge of microbial communities and diversity [@doi:10.1038/nmicrobiol.2016.48; @doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0718-6; @doi:10.1038/s41579-019-0311-5].
INTRODUCE REFERENCE BASED METAGENOMICS, DE NOVO METAGENOMICS.
<!--
Many of these insights are attributable to *de novo* assembly and binning, which estimate species-level composite genomes (metagenome-assembled genomes, *MAGs*) from genomes in a sample, capturing unculturable genomes which have expanded the tree of life and and our understanding of microbial metabolism in diverse environments [@doi:10.1038/nature02340; @doi:10.1038/nmicrobiol.2016.48; @doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0718-6].
-->

Along with these advances, the concept of metapangenomics has arisen as a framework for understanding how sets of metagenome-derived genes that are attributable to a group of organisms correlate with parameters in the environments in which they are sampled from [@doi:10.7717/peerj.4320; @doi:10.1038/s41396-019-0516-7; @doi:10.1007/978-3-030-38281-0_9].
Metapangenomic methods borrow heavily from pangenome analysis.
Pangenomes comprise all genes found within a group of organisms and reflect the metabolic and ecological plasticity of that group (CITE).
The pangenome is divided into core and accessory genes, where core genes are shared by almost all members in the group and accessory genes are not.
Core genes often encode primary metabolism or other functions necessary for a group to live in a given environment (CITE), while accessory genes encode functions that facilitate adaptation to changing environments (CITE: Roth).
The size of the pangenome reflects the diversity of the organisms in a pangenome (population size, number of organisms sampled) as well as the ability of those organisms to adapt to different niches (CITE: Tettelin 2005).
Open pangenomes are those which increase indefinitely in size when adding new genomes, while closed pangenomes do not.

While pangenomes are traditionally inferred from isolate genomes, metapangenomics extends the ecological framework of pangenomics to metagenomes.
Metapangenomics gives insight into the genes that support specific environmental adaptations [@doi:10.1038/s41396-019-0516-7] by applying pangenome methods to metagenome assembled genomes (MAGs) (CITE), or by mapping metagenomes against isolate-inferred pangenomes (CITE: Delmont).
Both methods give valuable insight into the presence and distribution of functional content in natural microbial communities, but either may introduce biases associated with unknown sequencing content (CITE: Segata, unknown).
MAGs are often incomplete or unrecoverable due to low sequencing coverage or large amounts of variation (SNPs, indels, rearrangements, horizontal gene transfer, sequencing error, etc.), both of which cause short read assemblers to produce unbinnable short contiguous sequences.
Unbinned sequences are disproportionately comprised of genomic islands and plasmids [@doi:10.1099/mgen.0.000436], hot spots for evolution that support microbial adaptation to changing environments [@doi:10.1101/2021.03.15.435471].
In contrast, read mapping against isolate-inferred pangenomes may miss functional content present in the metagenome but missing from references, especially for species under represented or unrecorded in reference databases.

These issues are not exclusive to metapangenome inference, and many recently developed analysis strategies overcome some of these biases.
These techniques largely rely on k-mers, words of length *k* in DNA or protein sequences.
Metagenome k-mer profiles contain all sequences in a metagenome, including those which may not assemble or bin, or which aren't in reference databases.
Long k-mers are also taxonomy-specific, where increasing k-mer length leads to sub-species discriminatory power [@doi:10.1128/mSystems.00020-16] (CITE: tessa).
These properties have popularized the use of k-mers for metagenome analysis, primarily through lightweight sketching and compact de Bruijn assembly graphs (cDBGs). 
Lightweight sketching facilitates fast and accurate sequence comparisons between potentially large data sets through random but consistent sub-sampling (CITE: Mash, gather paper).
cDBGs maintain connectivity between k-mers and organize them into species-specific neighborhoods (CITE: barnum, sgc).

<!--
Metapangenomics is reliant on *de novo* metagenome analysis, but both assembly and binning introduce biases into analysis [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02066-4; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.4458; @doi:10.1101/2021.07.12.451567; @doi:10.1038/s41396-018-0081-5; @doi:10.1099/mgen.0.000436; @doi:10.1101/2021.05.04.442591].
Low coverage or large amounts of variation (SNPs, indels, rearrangements, horizontal gene transfer, sequencing error, etc.) cause assemblers to break contiguous sequences, producing short fragments or unassembled reads that are too short to be binned into MAGs (CITE).
-->

To more fully represent the functional potential in metapangenomes, we present an analysis approach that relies on amino acid and reduced alphabet k-mers to estimate microbial (meta)pangenomes. 
In order to derive these k-mers directly from shotgun metagenome reads, we demonstrate the accuracy of a tool called orpheum for open reading frame prediction from short sequencing reads.
We demonstrate the application of the method to species present over time in a time series metagenomes from a human gut microbiome.
We use assembly graph genome queries to retrieve species-specific reads from the metagenome, predict open reading frames from those reads using orpheum, and build a metapangenome using protein k-mers.
This approach for metapangenome estimation is minimally reliant on reference databases and is assembly-free.
