# Results

In an effort to reconstruct metapangenomes without loss of information from assembly and binning [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02066-4; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.4458; @doi:10.1101/2021.07.12.451567; @doi:10.1038/s41396-018-0081-5; @doi:10.1099/mgen.0.000436; @doi:10.1101/2021.05.04.442591], we demonstrate a pipeline that relies on k-mers and assembly graphs for metapangenome estimation (**Figure @fig:overview**).
We first show that amino acid k-mers (k~aa~-mers) accurately estimate microbial pangenomes by comparing amino acid profiles of proteomes (translated coding domain sequences) against the proteomes themselves (**Figure @fig:overview A**).
To derive amino acid k-mers directly from shotgun metagenome reads, we next demonstrate the accuracy of a tool called orpheum for open reading frame prediction from short sequencing reads (**Figure @fig:overview B**).
We use assembly graph genome queries to retrieve species-specific reads from the metagenome, predict open reading frames from those reads using orpheum, and build a metapangenome using protein k-mers (**Figure @fig:overview C**).
We then apply this method to species present in time-series metagenomes from a human gut microbiome.

![
**Overview of the pipeline used to build metapangenomes.** 
Approaches that were developed or tested in this manuscript are outlined in grey.
**A)** We tested whether amino acid k-mers could accurately represent bacterial and archaeal pangenomes. Using genomes annotated with prokka, we compared pangenomes built with roary, a field-standard pipeline, against pangenomes built with k~aa~-mer sketches.
**B)** We tested whether open reading frames could be predicted directly from short sequencing reads using the tool orpheum. This panel is modified from [@doi:10.1101/2021.07.09.450799].
**C)** We combined this approaches with metagenome assembly graph genome queries to estimate metapangenomes directly from metagenomes without assembly or binning.
The blue and orange lines correspond to steps tested in panels **A** and **B**.
The workflow presented in steps 1-3 of panel **C** is published in [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02066-4].
](images/metapangenome_paper_overview.png){#fig:overview}

## Protein k-mers accurately estimate characteristics of microbial pangenomes

Pangenomes from isolates are typically built by assembling each isolate genome and predicting genes (open reading frames), clustering gene sequences from all genomes into a non-redundant set, and estimating the presence/absence or abundance of each gene in each genome. 
To determine whether bacterial and archaeal pangenomes could be constructed from protein k-mers, we compared pangenomes estimated from genes against those estimated from k-mers.
We compared pangenomes from 23 species belonging to 23 phyla in the GTDB taxonomy [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkab776], with pangenome size ranging from 20-972 genomes (mean = 203 genomes, median = 44 genomes) (**Figure @fig:tree_fig**).
For each pangenome, we computed the R^2^ between the total number of genes to the total number of k-mers, and the number of unique genes to the number of distinct k-mers within each genome.
We also tested the similarity of presence/absence profiles between pangenomes constructed with different methods using the Mantel test [@pmid:6018555].

The strength of the relationship between k-mers and genes varied dramatically for some pangenomes. 
Both k-mers and genes are highly correlated in DNA or protein space for most pangenomes, while a few pangenomes were outliers with low correlations (**Figure @fig:boxplt_fig**).
We investigated pangenomes more closely to determine the source of the poor correlations and found that they were caused by the presence of many frameshifted proteins, one of many potential criteria for exclusion of GenBank genomes from RefSeq.
For example, *Leptospira interrogans* had an R^2^ of 0.12 between the total number of genes and k-mers in genomes in the pangenome, but 21 of 317 genomes contained frameshifted proteins.
Removing genomes with many frameshifted proteins increased the R^2^ to 0.87 (**Figure @fig:panmers_fig A**).
This trend was consistent across pangenomes, where pangenomes with one or more frameshift-excluded genome had significantly lower R^2^ values between total number of genes and k-mers per genome than pangenomes without (Welch Two Sample t-test, estimate = -0.36, p = 0.003) (**Figure @fig:panmers_fig B**). 
Other RefSeq exclusion criteria did not impact the correlation between the total genes and k-mers per genome for a given pangenome.

A range of k-mer sizes in amino acid alphabets had comparable performance.
Using pangenomes that contained no genomes excluded from RefSeq for containing many frameshifted proteins (n = 13), we found that k-mer size had little impact on the accuracy of pangenome estimation (**Figure @fig:panmers_fig C**).
This is likely because the genomes of the same species are closely related, so protein k-mers are sufficient to overcome minor genomic variations such as those introduced by codon degeneracy or evolutionary drift [@doi:10.1111/jse.12233].
The one exception was for nucleotide k-mers (*k* = 31), which did not correlate as strongly with gene-based pangenomes.
This supports the use of amino acid k-mer encodings over nucleotide k-mers for construction of pangenomes.
Given that neither encoding nor k-mer size impacted these performance metrics, we selected protein k-mers with *k* = 10 to complete the rest of our analysis as this combination was the only combination to fall among the top five performers across all three metrics.
In addition, protein k-mers of length 10 have recently been shown to perform well for comparisons across variable taxonomic distances [@url:https://bluegenes.github.io/2022-paper-protein-kmers].

![
**Amino acid k-mers accurately estimate characteristics of bacterial and archaeal pangenomes.**
**A, B)** Genomes that are excluded from RefSeq for having many frameshifted proteins reduce similarity between gene- and k-mer-based pangenomes.
**A)** Scatter plot of the total number of genes and k-mers per genome for the species *Leptospira interrogans*, where each point represents a single genome in the pangenome. 
Removing genomes flagged with RefSeq exclusion criteria "many frameshifted proteins" improves the correlation between these variables.
The light grey line corresponds to regression results when all points are used, while the dark grey line corresponds to regression results when flagged genomes are removed.
**B)** Box plot of R^2^ values between the total number of genes and k-mers per genome. 
Pangenomes that contain genomes with the RefSeq exclusion criteria of "many frameshifted proteins" have significantly lower R^2^ values.
**C)** Box plots representing the distribution of R^2^ values for linear models (Total, Unique) or statistic values for mantel tests (Mantel). Only pangenomes that do not contain genomes with the RefSeq exclusion criteria "many frameshifted proteins" are plotted. K-mer size corresponds to the number of amino acid sequences used for the k-mer for all k-mers except *k* = 31, which corresponds to the number of nucleotides. *Total* corresponds to correlations between the total number of distinct genes and k-mers in a genome. *Unique* corresponds to correlations between the number of unique genes and k-mers in genome. *Mantel* corresponds to mantel tests between the gene and k-mer presence-absence matrices.
**D)** Pangenome metrics strongly correlate between gene- and k-mer-based pangenomes. Pangenome categories core, shell, and cloud refer to genes or k-mers shared between the majority (>95%), some, or singleton genomes in the pangenome. Alpha is a value from Heaps law used to estimate whether a pangenome is open or closed.
](images/panmers_fig.png){#fig:panmers_fig}

We next investigated whether other pangenome metrics were well correlated between our k-mer-based method and the gene-based method roary (see Methods for details).
For 13 pangenomes, the percent of k-mers or genes predicted to be part of the core, shell, or cloud pangenome was strongly correlated (**Figure @fig:panmers_fig** D).
The content of the core genomes was also similar between pangenomes built with different methods.
Focusing on genes or k-mers shared between all genomes in a pangenome, and limiting our inquiry to pangenomes with at least five genes shared between all genomes (n = 11), we found core k-mers contained an average of 83.9% (SD = 15.4%) of sequences in core genes, while core genes contained an average of 73.5% (SD = 16.9%) of sequences in core k-mers.
This indicates congruence in the functional content represented by the core fractions of both pangenome types.
Lastly, we compared whether pangenomes would be designated as open or closed by calculating the alpha value for the Heaps law model [@doi:10.1016/j.mib.2008.09.006]. 
Alpha values were strongly correlated between gene- and k-mer based pangenomes (**Figure @fig:panmers_fig** D). 

Taken together, these results show that reduced alphabet k-mers can accurately estimate key characteristics of pangenomes from bacterial and archaeal genomes.

## K-mer methods accurately predict open reading frames in short sequencing reads

We next sought to determine whether open reading frames could be accurately predicted directly from short sequencing reads, as this would enable k-mer-based pangenome analysis without assembly.
Without accurate open reading frame prediction, reads would need to be translated into all six translation frames prior to k-mer decomposition.
This would inflate the number of k-mers and decrease similarity between genomes.

We evaluated whether orpheum, a tool recently developed to predict open reading frames in Eukaryotic short reads [@doi:10.1101/2021.07.09.450799], could also perform this task in bacterial and archaeal sequences.
Orpheum predicts open reading frames by comparing reduced alphabet k-mers in six frame translations of short sequencing reads against those in a database (containment) and assigns an open reading frame as coding if containment exceeds a user-defined threshold [@doi:10.1101/2021.07.09.450799].
To evaluate orpheum, we constructed a database containing all k-mers in coding domain sequences from genomes in GTDB rs202.
Using representative genomes from the 23 species above, as well as 20 additional RefSeq genomes not in the GTDB rs202 database, we simulated short sequencing reads either from coding domain sequences or non-coding sequences and used these reads to test orpheum.

Using default parameters, orpheum accurately separated coding from non-coding reads when reads were simulated from genomes in GTDB (**Figure @fig:orpheum_fig A**).
On average, 5.3% (SD = 2.8%) of reads that were coding were incorrectly predicted to be non-coding, while 4.9% (SD = 1.5%) of reads that were non-coding were incorrectly predicted to be coding.
For reads simulated from genomes not in GTDB, orpheum recovered the majority of coding reads when genomes of the same species were in the database (**Figure @fig:orpheum_fig A,B**).
On average, 30.2% (SD = 27.1%) of reads that were coding were predicted to be non-coding, while 4.8% (SD = 5.5%) of reads that were non-coding were predicted to be coding.
Accuracy decreased with increasing taxonomic distance between the query genome and the closest relative in the database (**Figure @fig:orpheum_fig B**).

For genomes that had at least species-level representatives in GTDB, the largest source of error was non-coding reads being predicted as coding (**Figure @fig:orpheum_fig A**).
We hypothesized that these reads originated from pseudogenes as these sequences would likely not be annotated as coding in the genomes from which the reads were simulated from, but may retain some k-mers contained in the database.
To assess this hypothesis, we used annotation files produced by the NCBI Prokaryotic Genome Annotation Pipeline (PGAP), which annotates pseudogenes, for the 23 genomes for which these files were available [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkw569; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkaa1105].
On average, 12.4% (SD = 13.8%) of non-coding reads that were predicted to be coding fell within pseudogenes annotated by the PGAP pipeline.
We then BLASTed a subset of the remaining non-coding reads that were predicted to be coding against the NCBI nr database.
All reads we investigated had at least one match at 100% identity to protein sequences in the database, suggesting our test genomes contained additional pseudogenes not annotated by PGAP, or that the software we used to predict open reading frames missed some coding sequences (see Methods).
<!--Indeed, the worst performer was *Mycoplasmopsis bovis*, with 23% of non-coding reads predicted to be coding. 
*M. bovis* causes bovine tuberculosis and its genome contains signatures of genomic decay and pseudogenization [@doi:10.3389/fmicb.2017.02389], processes that may be linked to bacterial host specialization [@doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a010041; @doi:10.1093/gbe/evv135].-->
Because this method of open reading frame prediction cannot distinguish pseudogenes from genes, it may not be appropriate for species with many pseudogenes.

Some coding sequences were also predicted to be non-coding. 
We hypothesized that this was caused by sequencing error introduced into the simulated reads.
We mapped the simulated reads against the coding domain sequences from which they were derived and calculated mapping error rates. 
While all reads mapped, the error rate was higher for reads that were predicted to be non-coding than those predicted to be coding (Welch Two Sample t-test, estimate = 0.00523, p < 0.001).

Protein k-mers from predicted open reading frames in the simulated short sequencing reads recapitulated similarity between genomic coding domain sequences.
We estimated the Jaccard similarity between genomes using k~aa~-mers (*k* = 10) from annotated coding domain sequences, and compared this against Jaccard similarity between genomes using k~aa~-mers from predicted open read frames in the simulated short sequencing reads.
Genomes that were most similar in one matrix were also most similar in another matrix (Mantel statistic = 0.9975, p < 0.001). 
The average similarity among all pairwise comparisons for the coding domain sequences was 2.6%, and this decreased to 2.5% when using the open reading frames predicted from reads.
This demonstrates that information recovered from open reading frame prediction on short reads is similar to that derived directly from the genome sequence.

The majority of predictive capability originated from species-level databases.
We performed ORF prediction using just species-level databases for genomes that had at least a species-level representative in GTDB, and compared this against ORF prediction using the full GTDB database. 
On average, there was no change between the percent of reads derived from coding domain sequences when a species-level database was used versus when all of GTDB was used to predict open reading frames (**Figure @fig:orpheum_db**).

Decreasing the Jaccard containment threshold increased the sensitivity and specificity of ORF prediction when there are no closely related genomes in the database (**Figure @fig:orpheum_fig C, Table @tbl:threshold**).
The Jaccard containment threshold controls the final prediction of coding vs. non-coding, as well as the the number of open reading frames which a read is translated into.
On average, increasing the rank of the closest taxonomic relative in the database by one taxonomic level decreased the optimal Jaccard containment threshold by 0.13.
We note that orpheum performed well, achieving sensitivity > 0.9 or better, when genomes of the same strain, species, and genus are present, but decreases significantly when the next closest relative is at the family level (**Figure @fig:orpheum_fig C**).


|Jaccard threshold | closest rank | mean sensitivity| mean specificity | mean Youden's index |
|:-------------:|:------------:|:--------------:|:--------------:|:------------:|
|          0.47 | genome       |          0.988 |           0.971|       0.959|
|          0.39 | species      |          0.941 |           0.961|       0.902|
|          0.17 | genus        |          0.790 |           0.862|       0.653|
|          0.07 | family       |          0.593 |           0.878|       0.471|
Table: Jaccard containment thresholds that maximize the Youden's index depending on the taxonomic rank of the closest relative in GTDB.
{#tbl:threshold}

Overall, these results show that open reading frames can be accurately determined from short sequencing reads when closely related proteomes are available.

![
**Orpheum correctly assigned short sequencing reads as coding or non-coding and selects the correct open reading frame.**
**A)** Percent of simulated coding or non-coding sequences predicted as coding, non-coding, or discarded based on quality metrics (see methods). 
Genomes are split by those in GTDB and those not in GTDB.
Genomes not in GTDB are labelled by taxonomic assignment from GTDB-tk.
Predictions were made using default parameters (Jaccard containment = 0.5).
**B)** Boxplots of the percent of coding reads that were recovered by Orpheum, separated by the level of taxonomic assignment achieved by GTDB-Tk. 
Orpheum recovers more coding sequences when there are closely related genomes in the database. 
**C)** Receiver operating curves for the Jaccard containment thresholds. 
Curves are separated by the level of taxonomic assignment achieved by GTDB-Tk, and values are averaged across all genomes that fell within those categories.
The best Jaccard threshold decreases when there are fewer closely related genomes in the database.
](images/orpheum_fig.png){#fig:orpheum_fig}


## K-mer-based metapangenomics combined with assembly graphs reveals strain dynamics

Given that amino acid k-mers accurately estimated pangenomes, and that the correct open reading frame could be predicted reliably from short sequencing data, we next combined these approaches to perform metapangenome analysis from short read shotgun metagenomes.
We used 12 metagenomes from a single individual sampled over the course of a year by the Integrated Human Microbiome Project (iHMP) [@doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1238-8]. 
The individual was diagnosed with Crohn's disease, a sub type of inflammatory bowel disease characterized by inflammation along the gastrointestinal tract. 
The individual received three courses of antibiotics over the year and each course was separated by weeks without antibiotics (**Figure @fig:metap_fig A**).


We estimated the metapangenome for each species that was detected in all 12 metagenomes and that accounted for at least 2% of reads across metagenomes, for a total of six metapangenomes (**Figure @fig:metap_fig A**).
To obtain all sequencing reads that originated from genomes of these species, we performed assembly graph genome queries [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02066-4].
Assembly graphs contain all sequences in a metagenome, and assembly graph queries return sequences in the metagenome that are either in the query or nearby to the query in the graph.
Assembly graph genome queries return sequencing reads that originate from genomes in the metagenome that have as little as 0.1 Jaccard similarity (approximately 93% average nucleotide identity (ANI) [@url:https://bluegenes.github.io/2022-paper-protein-kmers]) to the query genome [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02066-4].
After retrieving reads in this way, we predicted open reading frames using orpheum. 
We used species-level databases as these were successful in the context of isolate genomes not in the database (see above) and because they would be more likely to filter out reads beyond the species boundary (95% ANI [@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07641-9]) that were returned by assembly graph queries.
Using the predicted amino acid sequences, we built k~aa~-mer metapangenomes for each of the six species (**Figure @fig:overview C, Figure @fig:metap_sfig, Table @tbl:metap**).

We compared these metapangenomes against reference pangenomes built using genomes of the same species in GTDB and against *de novo* metapangenomes built from MAGs of the same species that were assembled and binned from these samples (see Methods).
Almost all sequences from the reference pangenome occurred within the k~aa~-mer metapangenomes (**Figure @fig:metap_fig B**), indicating we recovered the majority of sequencing variation contained within the reference pangenome. 
Further, a large fraction of sequences were shared between the *de novo* metapangenome and the k~aa~-mer metapangenome (**Figure @fig:metap_fig B**), indicating we also recover the majority of variation captured by assembly and binning.

A large fraction of k-mers were only represented in the k~aa~-mer metapangenome (**Figure @fig:metap_fig B**).
To determine whether these sequences represented true biological variation from our query species and not contamination from other species, we next iteratively mapped the reads that were used to build the k~aa~-mer metapangenome against the reference pangenome and the *de novo* metapangenome (**Figure @fig:metap_fig C**).
The majority of reads mapped against the reference pangenomes (mean = 92.2%, SD = 12.4%), a few of the unmapped reads mapped against the *de novo* metapangenome (mean = 0.8%, SD = 1.3%), and 7.1% (SD = 12.3%) of reads did not map.
We repeated this process a second time but mapped in amino acid space.
Mapping in amino acid space improves sensitivity over nucleotide mapping [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx021].
The fraction of reads that mapped increased by an average of 1.7% (Welch Two Sample Paired t-test, estimate = 1.9, p < 0.001), accounting for 94.6% of total reads and indicating that a substantial fraction of distinct sequences in the k~aa~-mer metapangenome represent diverged sequences with similar amino acid sequences.

On average, 5.4% (SD = 12%) of reads from the k~aa~-mer metapangenome were unaccounted for after mapping against other (meta)pangenomes.
We assembled and annotated these reads, and BLASTed the 88 resultant protein sequences against the NCBI nr database.
Of 56 predicted genes with a BLAST hit, 76.8% matched sequences from the same species or closest specified lineage level as the top hit.
This suggests our method recovers functional sequences even if those sequences are not in MAGs or in reference databases (in this case, in NCBI nr but not GTDB).

<!-- A small fraction (XX%) of reads did not map or assemble and annotate.
Of that reads that did not map, we had low expectation that the majority would assemble, as we expect many of these reads to represent diverged sequences of genes that were already represented in other (meta)pangenomes 
While we cannot confirm the identity of these reads, we presume these reads represent true variation attributable to the species investigated. 
OR BLASTP a subset using orpheum? -->

Visualizing the k~aa~-mer metapangenomes alongside sequencing depth information, we observed dynamics in the presence of species (**Figure @fig:metap_sfig A**) or strains (**Figure @fig:metap_sfig B**) in response to antibiotic administration.
The fluctuation of the presence of species indicates that antibiotic administration impacted the community structure of the gut microbiome, as is expected [@doi:10.3390/biomedicines8110502].
This is exemplified by periodic blooms of *Enterocloster bolteae*, an organism associated with disturbance succession [@doi:10.1101/gr.138198.112].

Similarly, we detected changes in accessory k~aa~-mers, the majority of which appeared or disappeared on or after the start of metronidazole administration at week 13 (**Figure @fig:metap_sfig B**).
Metronidazole targets anaerobic bacteria via reduction by pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase system which creates an electron sink that produces free radicals that are toxic to cells [@doi:10.1093/jac/31.1.9]. 
Metronidazole treatment disproportionately impacts the presence of anaerobes in the gut microbiome [@doi:10.1007/s10350-004-0623-y].
We hypothesized that fluctuations in accessory k~aa~-mers reflected strain-level turn over in the community.
To confirm this, we compared the nucleotide k-mer content in each query neighborhood against the GTDB database to determine which strains were present (**Figure @fig:metap_fig D**).
We used a k-mer size of 51, as this is indicative of strain-level similarity [@doi:10.1128/mSystems.00020-16; @url:https://bluegenes.github.io/2022-paper-protein-kmers].
In each of the three species we investigated, we identified different patterns of strain fluctuations.
In *Bacteroides uniformis*, only one strain of *B. uniformis* (BIOML-A27) was present until week 25, when another strain appears (BIOML-A2).
In *Parabacteroides distasonis*, the dominant strain switches at week 13 (20_3 to OF01-14), coincident with other strains appearing (BIOML-A21, BIOML-A26, BIOML-A32).
Lastly, in *Phocaeicola vulgatus*, the dominant strain does not change through the time course, but multiple other strains are detected with one strain switch occurring at week 13 (H23 and AM38-19 to VPI-4496.2).

Taken together, these results demonstrate that k~aa~-mer metapangenomes built from metagenome assembly graph neighborhoods can capture species and strain dynamics in microbiome communities.


![**K~aa~-mer metapangenomes reveal species and strain dynamics in time series gut microbiome metagenomes after antibiotic exposure.**
**A)** Antibiotic courses and corresponding gut microbiome profiles for a single individual with Crohn's disease.
Fractional abundances are colored by species, with only the six species that accounted for greater than 2% of all metagenome reads displayed.
**B)** Upset plot of amino acid k-mers (*k* = 10) present in the k~aa~-mer metapangenomes, the *de novo* metapangenomes, and the reference pangenome. 
Intersections are colored by species. 
**C)** Bar plots indicating the average fraction of reads used to build the k~aa~-mer metapangenome that mapped first against the reference pangenome, then against the *de novo* metapangenome, or were unmapped. 
More reads mapped in amino acid space than in nucleotide space.
Only the fraction of reads that mapped to the reference pangenome and the fraction reads that were unmapped are labelled.
**D)** Bar plots of the fraction of k~aa~-mer metapangenome sequences that were anchored to a given strain using the sourmash gather algorithm against the GTDB rs202 database (*k* = 51).
Colors represent strains, which are labelled by their NCBI strain name. 
Missing fractions depicted as blank space between the bar and one represent novel k-mers not in the database.
Only genomes that accounted for greater than 2% of the weighted fractional abundance and that were annotated as the same species are colored.
Weeks in which the species was low-abundance are excluded.
Starting at at week 13, sequences from previously unobserved strains were detected within each metapangenome.
This timing coincides with metronidazole administration.
](images/metap_figure_panel.png){#fig:metap_fig}
