# Discussion

We present a method to perform assembly-free metapangenomics that is minimally reliant on reference databases.
We show that pangenome metrics like core, cloud, and shell pangenome fractions can be accurately estimated with amino acid k-mers (*k* = 10).
We then demonstrate accurate prediction of open reading frames in highly accurate short sequencing reads by comparing amino acid k-mers in all translation frames against a database of k-mers from bacterial and archaeal genomes in GTDB (rs202).
Combining these tools enables pangenome estimation directly from quality controlled short sequencing reads.
In the context of metagenomes, these approaches enable metapangenome estimation without the need to *de novo* assemble and bin sequences, eliminating common sources of lost sequencing variation [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02066-4]. These techniques also reduce the dependence of metapangenomics on complete or comprehensive reference databases, which can be important for understudied environments.

While we leverage open reading frame prediction from short reads and k~aa~-mer pangenomes in the context of metapangenomes, these approaches have additional applications. 
Open reading frame prediction with orpheum can be executed on microbial Illumina short read data sets.
This may improve functional recall from metagenome short reads from organisms without reference genomes and from communities that have low assembly rates [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0169662], or from metatranscriptomes, however these applications must be validated.
Similarly, k~aa~-mer pangenomes built from sketches may offer benefits over other pangenome construction methods, many of which are predominately tied to exact matching of k-mers between genomes.
Exact matching of k-mers between genomes enables additional genomes to be added to the pangenome without having to re-cluster gene sequences. 
Exact matching also allows direct comparisons to distantly related organisms, which creates a unified framework for genome comparisons even when organisms are distantly related.
While we predominantly explored k~aa~-mers of length 10 in this paper, k-mers from other degenerate alphabets like Dayhoff or hydrophobic-polar encodings may allow for accurate comparisons at greater evolutionary distances [@doi:10.1101/2021.07.09.450799; @url:https://bluegenes.github.io/2022-paper-protein-kmers].
When pangenomes are built from FracMinHashes as performed here, the scaled down sampling parameter may also enable faster pangenome size estimation even for very large collections of genomes and could be potentially used a quality control metric for annotated genomes.
While developed for the metapangenomics space, this study demonstrates that k~aa~-mer pangenomes also accurately estimate pangenomes built from isolate genomes. 
Since building k~aa~-mer sketches and searching for exact matches of k~aa~-mers between genomes is fast, this provides an alternative approach for building pangenomes.
Lastly, our results suggest that the number of k~aa~-mers in a genome strongly correlates with the number of genes; we observed that while the number of genes per genome is increased for genomes with the RefSeq exclusion criteria of "many frameshifted proteins", there is no commensurate increase in the number of k~aa~-mers observed. 
This suggests that the number of k~aa~-mers in a genome could be used to predict the expected range of predicted genes, and could be used as a quality diagnostic criteria.

We posit that the combination of these approaches is potentially most useful in the context of analyzing metagenome assembly graphs.
Assembly graphs like compact de Bruijn graphs (cDBG) capture all sequences in a metagenome, including sequences with high strain variation or low coverage, which may not be captured by other analysis methods. 
A targeted query of an assembly graph, for example with a metagenome-assembled genome bin, can recover all sequencing reads in a metagenome that originate from all genomes of the same species [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02066-4]. 
Often, reads may be longer than unitigs (nodes) in the cDBG in regions of high variation making read retrieval desirable.
While recovering these reads and assigning their taxonomic identity through graph queries is useful, many of the recovered reads cannot be assembled due to prolific sequencing variation attributable to strain diversity in the original microbial community.
Yet, the sequences represented by these un-assembleable reads often encode functional potential, some of which may be key to a microorganisms functioning within its ecosystem [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx681; @doi:10.1038/s41396-018-0081-5].
The approaches presented in this paper enable these sequences to be represented in metapangenome estimation.
Indeed, as demonstrated by the number of bins generated per species at each time point, many species were observed in a sample for which no bin was produced, often because the species was present at low abundance (**Figure @fig:metap_sfig**).
K~aa~-mer metapangenomes rescue these sequences and include them in the analysis.

Interestingly, in some samples, *de novo* metagenome analysis produced multiple MAGs (**Figure @fig:metap_sfig**).
While not explored here, it may be possible to estimate the number of strains present in a sample using k~aa~-mer abundances.
FracMinHash sketches optionally retain abundance information, so it is possible that this information could be retrieved directly from these sketches.

This method is not without shortcomings, the largest of which is the current lack of integration of k~aa~-mers with functional annotations.
We see three avenues by which this could be ameliorated.
First, the underlying cDBG used to produce assembly graph query neighborhoods could be annotated, and these annotations could be paired with k~aa~-mers. 
The technology to do this exists [@doi:10.1007/978-3-030-18174-1_6; @url:https://dib-lab.github.io/2021-paper-ibd], however this approach is the least scalable option.
Second, using the sequences included in the orpheum species databases, species-level protein databases that include functional annotations could be built and searched using sourmash gather. 
While rapid, this approach is undesirable given its reliance on existing annotations for genes within a given species. 
Lastly, a database such as the NCBI nr database could be made searchable in a similar capacity, increasing the breadth of possible matches. 
This may require new algorithm development to maintain scalability [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.01.019984].

While cDBGs are often common intermediary data structures in bioinformatics pipelines (e.g., metagenome assembly), the organization of cDBGs is still under explored.
Sequences from a genome or from closely related genomes often co-locate in neighborhoods of the cDBG [@doi:10.1038/s41396-018-0081-5; @doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02066-4], but regions of high sequence conservation and horizontally transferred genes create bridges between otherwise distant neighborhoods in the graph [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx681, @doi:10.1038/s41396-018-0081-5]. 
Even still, species-level neighborhoods are well conserved and can be extracted [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02066-4; @doi:10.1101/2022.02.25.481923].
As we observed in strain-level plots of query neighborhoods wherein a fraction of the graph fell in the "other category" and belonged to low-abundance strains of the same species or organisms of other closely-related species (**Figure @fig:metap_fig D**), it is unclear the extent to which assembly graph organization breaks down in real metagenomes. 
Prolific horizontal gene transfer could account for shared sequencing content, either by collapsing neighborhoods in the graph or by increasing the fraction of shared sequences between community members.
Deeply sequenced paired long and short reads from the same community could help resolve these questions.

While we observe strain dynamics, the ecological reason for those signals cannot be determined from short read sequences alone; the patterns we observe could be the result of strain turn over, the presence of multiple strains, horizontal gene transfer between strains, or some combination of all of these influences.
Again, long read sequencing, or sequencing from isolate genomes, could resolve these questions, particularly as long read lineage-resolved methods become mainstream [@doi:10.1038/s41587-021-01130-z].
In principle, the methods presented here should extend directly to long read sequences, however this remains a point of future research.


